# Sput Unit Testing Tutorial

## Overview

[Sput] -- A Simple, Portable Unit Testing Framework for C/C++.

Its main goals include simple use and portability. As a result
Sput consists of a single header file and uses standard ANSI C only.

Learning how to use Sput will likely take you *less than 10 minutes* -
just add it to your project and focus on testing your software.

## Features

  * Easy to use (single header file, intuitive API)
  * Portable (plain ANSI C)
  * Intuitive reporting
  * Fit the needs of test-driven software development

## General Workflow

Sput allows you to group your tests into different **suites**, each
containing a set of **tests** that perform all **checks** necessary to prove
that your software works as expected.

                               +------------------+
    Suite                      |  your_function() |              ...
                               +------------------+
                              /                    \
                       +----------+        +------------------+
    Tests/Test Cases   | Boundary |        | Invalid Argument |  ...
                       +----------+        +------------------+
                       /         /          \                /
                 +-----+   +-----+           +-----+   +-----+
    Checks       | Min |   | Max | ...       | 1st |   | 2nd |   ...
                 +-----+   +-----+           +-----+   +-----+

Sput will evaluate all **checks** and report success and failure for each
suite. Additionally an overall evaluation of all suites is given. An
appropriate exit value will be generated that denotes whether all assumptions
on your software are true.


## Using Sput

Sput is implemented as a set of C preprocessor macros stored within a
single header file.
To use Sput, simply include its header file an start testing your code.


## Sput Macros

All macros share the prefix `sput_` to prevent collisions with other
function or macro names.

### `sput_start_testing()`

This macro prepares all of Sput's data structures and has to be called
before any other Sput macro.

### `sput_set_output_stream(stream)`

This macro expects a `FILE` pointer. Afterwards, any Sput output will be
written to this *stream*. Passing `NULL` restores the default (stdout).

### `sput_enter_suite(name)`

This macro prepares Sput to enter a new **suite** "*name*".
It has to be called before any **tests** are run or **checks** are performed.

### `sput_run_test(function-name)`

This macro expects the *unquoted* name of the function that provides your
**test** case and its **checks**. It will run the test case immediately and
assign it to the current **suite**.

### `sput_fail_if(condition, description)`

This macro expects a condition and a (quoted) description of the **check**.
It may only be called within a **test** case. If the given condition evaluates
to true, the check will fail.

### `sput_fail_unless(condition, description)`

This macro expects a condition and a (quoted) description of the **check**.
It may only be called within a **test** case. If the given condition evaluates
to false, the check will fail.

### `sput_leave_suite()`

This macro leaves the current **suite** and generates a report on the
results. It is automatically called if either sput_enter_suite() or
sput_finish_testing() are called while a suite is still marked as active.

### `sput_finish_testing()`

This macro generates an overall statistic of all run **checks** in all
**suites**. Overall success means that all **checks** succeeded.

After calling `sput_finish_testing()` no more tests should be run.

### `sput_get_return_value()`

This macro expands to an expression denoting overall success or failure
(`EXIT_SUCCESS` or `EXIT_FAILURE`) -- it is intended to be returned from
`main()`.


## Workflow

  1. In `main()`, call `sput_start_testing()`.
  2. In `main()`, prepare and register your desired output stream using
     `sput_set_output_stream()` (optional).
  3. In `main()`, enter a suite by calling `sput_enter_suite()`.
  4. Outside of `main()`, create a new test function that constitutes your
     test/test case.
     No arguments will be passed and its return value will be ignored by
     Sput.
     In the test function, embed your checks using `sput_fail_if()` and/or
     `sput_fail_unless()`.
  5. In `main()`, run the test using `sput_run_test()`.
  6. Repeat 4. and 5. for all tests/test cases of the current suite.
  7. Repeat 3.
  8. In `main()`, call `sput_finish_testing()` to obtain the overall results
     of all suites.
  9. In `main()`, return `sput_get_return_value()` to indicate success or
     failure of your tests (optional).


## Note on Signal Handling

In order to provide a maximum of OS portability, Sput does not attempt
to "catch" and handle any signals that may be raised while testing.


## A Complete Example

The following example shows minimal testing of a buggy function that counts
vowels of a given string:

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <sput.h>

    /*
     * count_vowels() counts the vowels present in a given string.
     *
     * While the function basically works as expected, it recognizes
     * [aeiou] as vowels only and erroneously does not take uppercase
     * vowels into account.
     */
    static int count_vowels(const char *s)
    {
        const char *cp    = s;
        int         count = 0;

        while (*cp)
        {
            if (*cp == 'a' || *cp == 'e' || *cp == 'i' ||
                *cp == 'o' || *cp == 'u')
            {
                count++;
            }

            cp++;
        }

        return count;
    }

    static void test_vowels_present()
    {
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("book")  == 2, "book == 2v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("hand")  == 1, "hand == 1v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("test")  == 1, "test == 1v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("Peter") == 2, "Peter == 2v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("Apu")   == 2, "Apu == 2v");
    }

    static void test_no_vowels_present()
    {
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("GCC") == 0, "GCC == 0v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("BBC") == 0, "BBC == 0v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("CNN") == 0, "CNN == 0v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("GPS") == 0, "GPS == 0v");
        sput_fail_unless(count_vowels("Ltd") == 0, "Ltd == 0v");
    }

    int main(int argc, char *argv[])
    {
        sput_start_testing();

        sput_enter_suite("count_vowels(): Vowels Present");
        sput_run_test(test_vowels_present);

        sput_enter_suite("count_vowels(): No Vowels Present");
        sput_run_test(test_no_vowels_present);

        sput_finish_testing();

        return sput_get_return_value();
    }

Here's the test report generated by Sput:

    == Entering suite #1, "count_vowels(): Vowels Present" ==

    [1:1]  test_vowels_present:#1  "book == 2v"  pass
    [1:2]  test_vowels_present:#2  "hand == 1v"  pass
    [1:3]  test_vowels_present:#3  "test == 1v"  pass
    [1:4]  test_vowels_present:#4  "Peter == 2v"  pass
    [1:5]  test_vowels_present:#5  "Apu == 2v"  FAIL
    !    Type:      fail-unless
    !    Condition: count_vowels("Apu") == 2
    !    Line:      39

    --> 5 check(s), 4 ok, 1 failed (20.00%)

    == Entering suite #2, "count_vowels(): No Vowels Present" ==

    [2:1]  test_no_vowels_present:#1  "GCC == 0v"  pass
    [2:2]  test_no_vowels_present:#2  "BBC == 0v"  pass
    [2:3]  test_no_vowels_present:#3  "CNN == 0v"  pass
    [2:4]  test_no_vowels_present:#4  "GPS == 0v"  pass
    [2:5]  test_no_vowels_present:#5  "Ltd == 0v"  pass

    --> 5 check(s), 5 ok, 0 failed (0.00%)

    ==> 10 check(s) in 2 suite(s) finished after 0.00 second(s),
        9 succeeded, 1 failed (10.00%)

    [FAILURE]


[Sput]: http://www.use-strict.de/sput-unit-testing/
